Micah Stringham
April 8th, 2014

Chapter 9: problems 1, 3-11
#12 define EPROM and EEPROM
#13 define UART
#14 What is an interrupt?

1. three characteristics of a microproccessor:
First, they are usually found in so-called embedded systems,
running specialized single purpose code as part of a larger system, instead
of being general-purpose user-programmable computers. Second, they tend to be
smaller, less-capable computers (the Zilog Z8 Encore! microcontroller uses 8-bit
words, runs at 20MHz, can address only 64K of memory, and retails at about $4.
Compare this to a Pentium 4 processor which can easily cost $250 or more for the
bare processor — without memory and therefore independently useless). Third,
as hinted at, microcontrollers are usually single-chip gadgets, in that they have
their memory and most of their peripherial interfaces located on the same physical
chip.

3. How is the AVR limited:
The AVR doesn’t have support for floating point operations,
contains fewer than 10,000 bytes of memory, but has extensive on-board pe-
ripherial device support.

4. Is the Atmel an example of Von Nuemann arch?
The AVR is an example of Harvard architecture, where memory is divided
into several (in this case, three) different banks, each with different functions
and access methods.


5. ROM vs. RAM:
general-purpose RAM is for variable storage, where FLASH ROM is for program storage.

6. SRAM vs. DRAM
Each SRAM memory bit will typically require on the order of six to ten tran-
sistors to create than DRAM, which means that a byte of SRAM memory takes up to ten times
as much space on the chip and costs up to ten times as much money
On the other hand, because SRAM requires no refresh cycles, it can be accessed faster.
Where DRAM is usually used for main system memory (where the added cost of
several hundred megabytes adds up), SRAM is usually used in small, speed-critical
memory applications such as the computer’s cache memory. Despite the fact that SRAM
is self-refreshing, the transistors still need power in order to work, and SRAM will
lose its signal if power is cut off for too long (milliseconds). Thus, SRAM is still
considered to be volatile memory.

7. What are the memory banks of the Atmel AVR and what are their uses?
The registers (and I/O registers) of the AVR are located
in one of three memory banks, along with general-purpose RAM for variable
storage. The AVR also has a bank of FLASH ROM for program storage and
a bank of EEPROM for storage of static variables whose value must survive
a power outage.

8. Watchdog timer function:
An important kind of timer is the so-called
watchdog timer, whose purpose is to prevent the system from locking up.

9. memory-mapped I/O:
A method of performing I/O where specific memory locations are automatically
read by the I/O controller, instead of using the bus. It is a method using temporal locality over spacial locality.

10. How do LED's work in the Atmel?
To turn on an LED connected (say) to pin 6, the programmer
would first make sure that the the 6th bit of the DDR was set to 1 (configuring the
pin as an output device), then set the value in the 6th bit of the data register to ’1’,
bringing the pin voltage high (about 3–5 volts) and turning on the LED. Setting
this bit to ’0’ would correspondingly turn off the LED by setting the pin voltage to
near zero volts.

11.To make the stop lights flash "RED, OFF, RED, OFF," (on and off):
see problem 10 :)

12. EPROM (Erasable Programmable ROM)
chips use advanced quantum physics to create a semiconductor-based reusable fuse
at each memory element. To create an electrical connection, the memory location
is subjected to the same sort of overvoltage we’ve seen with the PROM. However,
applying several minutes of ultraviolet light will cause the “fuse” to reset. This will
erase the entire chip, allow it to be reprogrammed and reused.

13. EEPROM (Electronically Erasable Programmable ROM)
chips use a localized electrical field to “erase” each memory cell, instead
of erasing the entire chip as a whole. Because this operation is performed elec-
tronically, it doesn’t require the cabinet-sized UV chamber and can be part of the
distributed system

14. UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver and Transmitter) for large scale data
transmission/reception, an analog comparator to compare two analog sensor read-
ings, and so forth.

15. Interrupt technique:
When the event happens, one will then interrupt the current task to
deal with the event using the previously established procedure.
Eventually returing to original task.
